---
title: "Вопросы на собеседовании из курса Algorithms"
date: 2009-09-29T16:03:18+01:00
draft: false
tags: ["algorithms", "data structures", "interview"]
---
               
# Вопросы на собеседовании из курса Algorithms

Заканчивается первая часть курса Algorithms на coursera.org. Это был один
из немногих курсов, в котором мне понравилось абсолютно всё: прекрасная
подача материала (лектор — сам Седжвик), наглядные слайды, наличие
сопутствующей курсу книги, из которой можно почерпнуть больше подробностей
по теме, нетривиальные домашние задания и, наконец, вопросы для интервью.

Я первый раз вижу, чтобы в курсе давали примеры таких вопросов. Это
отличное подспорье для подготовки к собеседованиям, и поэтому я хочу
поделиться ими здесь.

## Union-Find

### Question 1 Social network connectivity

Given a social network containing N members and a log file containing M
timestamps at which times pairs of members formed friendships, design an
algorithm to determine the earliest time at which all members are
connected (i.e., every member is a friend of a friend of a friend … of a
friend). Assume that the log file is sorted by timestamp and that
friendship is an equivalence relation. The running time of your algorithm
should be MlogN or better and use extra space proportional to N.

Hint: union-find.

### Question 2 Union-find with specific canonical element

Add a method find() to the union-find data type so that find(i) returns
the largest element in the connected component containing i. The
operations, union(), connected(), and find() should all take logarithmic
time or better.

For example, if one of the connected components is {1,2,6,9}, then the
find() method should return 9 for each of the four elements in the
connected components.

Hint: maintain an extra array to the weighted quick-union data structure
that stores for each root i the large element in the connected component
containing i.

### Question 3 Successor with delete

Given a set of N integers S={0,1,...,N−1} and a sequence of requests of
the following form:

* Remove x from S
* Find the successor of x: the smallest y in S such that y ≥ x.

design a data type so that all operations (except construction) should
take logarithmic time or better.

Hint: use the modification of the union-find data discussed in the
previous question.

### Question 4 Union-by-size

Develop a union-find implementation that uses the same basic strategy as
weighted quick-union but keeps track of tree height and always links the
shorter tree to the taller one. Prove a lgN upper bound on the height of
the trees for N sites with your algorithm.

Hint: replace the sz[] array with a ht[] array such that ht[i] stores the
height of the subtree rooted at i.

## Analysis of Algorithms

### Question 1 3-SUM in quadratic time

Design an algorithm for the 3-SUM problem that takes time proportional to
N² in the worst case. You may assume that you can sort the N integers in
time proportional to N² or better.

[ ] Hint

given an integer x and a sorted array a[] of N distinct integers, design a
linear-time algorithm to determine if there exists two distinct indices i
and j such that a[i] + a[j] == x.

### Question 2 Search in a bitonic array

An array is bitonic if it is comprised of an increasing sequence of
integers followed immediately by a decreasing sequence of integers. Write
a program that, given a bitonic array of N distinct integer values,
determines whether a given integer is in the array. Standard version: Use
∼3lgN compares in the worst case. Signing bonus: Use ∼2lgN compares in the
worst case (and prove that no algorithm can guarantee to perform fewer
than ∼2lgN compares in the worst case).

Hints: Standard version. First, find the maximum integer using ∼1lgN
compares — this divides the array into the increasing and decreasing
pieces. Signing bonus. Do it without finding the maximum integer.

### Question 3 Egg drop

Suppose that you have an N-story building and plenty of eggs. An egg
breaks if it is dropped from floor T or higher and does not break
otherwise. Your goal is to devise a strategy to determine the value of T
given the following limitations on the number of eggs and tosses:

  * Version 0: 1 egg, ≤ T tosses.
  * Version 1: ∼1lgN eggs and ∼1lgN tosses.
  * Version 2: ∼lgT eggs and ∼2lgT tosses.
  * Version 3: 2 eggs and ∼2 sqrt(N) tosses.
  * Version 4: 2 eggs and ≤ c sqrt(T) tosses for some fixed constant c.

Hints:

  * Version 0: sequential search.
  * Version 1: binary search.
  * Version 2: find an interval containing T of size ≤2T, then do binary
 search.
  * Version 3: find an interval of size sqrt(N), then do sequential
 search.

Note: can be improved to ∼sqrt(2N) tosses.

  * Version 4: 1 + 2 + 3 + ... + t ∼ 1/2 t². Aim for c = 2 sqrt(2).

## Stacks and Queues

### Question 1 Queue with two stacks

Implement a queue with two stacks so that each queue operations takes a
constant amortized number of stack operations.

Hint: If you push elements onto a stack and then pop them all, they appear
in reverse order. If you repeat this process, they are now back in order.

### Question 2 Stack with max

Create a data structure that efficiently supports the stack operations
(push and pop) and also a return-the-maximum operation. Assume the
elements are reals numbers so that you can compare them.

Hint: Use two stacks, one to store all of the items and a second stack to
store the maximums.

### Question 3 Java generics

Explain why Java prohibits generic array creation.

Hint: to start, you need to understand that Java arrays are covariant but
Java generics are not: that is, `String[]` is a subtype of `Object[]`, but
`Stack<String>` is not a subtype of `Stack<Object>`.

### Question 4 Detect cycle in a linked list

A singly-linked data structure is a data structure made up of nodes where
each node has a pointer to the next node (or a pointer to null). Suppose
that you have a pointer to the first node of a singly-linked list data
structure:

  * Determine whether a singly-linked data structure contains a cycle. You
 may use only two pointers into the list (and no other variables). The
 running time of your algorithm should be linear in the number of nodes
 in the data structure.
  * If a singly-linked data structure contains a cycle, determine the
 first node that participates in the cycle. you may use only a constant
 number of pointers into the list (and no other variables). The running
 time of your algorithm should be linear in the number of nodes in the
 data structure.

You may not modify the structure of the linked list.

Hint: maintain a tortoise pointer that advances one node per time step and
a hare pointer that advances two nodes per time step.

### Question 5 Clone a linked structure with two pointers per node

Suppose that you are given a reference to the first node of a linked
structure where each node has two pointers: one pointer to the next node
in the sequence (as in a standard singly-linked list) and one pointer to
an arbitrary node.

Design a linear-time algorithm to create a copy of the doubly-linked
structure. You may modify the original linked structure, but you must end
up with two copies of the original.

Hint: begin by inserting a new node x′ into the linked list immediately
after each original node x.

## Elementary Sorts

### Question 1 Intersection of two sets

Given two arrays a[] and b[], each containing N distinct points in the
plane, design a subquadratic algorithm to determine how many points are
contained in both arrays.

Hint: shellsort.

### Question 2 Permutation

Given two integer arrays of size N, design a subquadratic algorithm to
determine whether one is a permutation of the other. That is, do they
contain exactly the same entries but, possibly, in a different order.

Hint: sort both arrays.

### Question 3 Dutch national flag

Given an array of N buckets, each containing a red, white, or blue pebble,
sort them by color. The allowed operations are:

  * swap(i,j): swap the pebble in bucket i with the pebble in bucket j.
  * color(i): color of pebble in bucket i.

The performance requirements are as follows:

  * At most N calls to color().
  * At most N calls to swap().
  * Constant extra space.

## Mergesort

### Question 1 Merging with smaller auxiliary array

Suppose that the subarray a[0] to a[N-1] is sorted and the subarray a[N]
to a[2 * N-1] is sorted. How can you merge the two subarrays so that a[0]
to a[2 * N-1] is sorted using an auxiliary array of size N (instead of
2N)?

Hint: copy only the left half into the auxiliary array.

### Question 2 Counting inversions

An inversion in an array a[] is a pair of entries a[i] and a[j] such that
i < j but a[i] > a[j]. Given an array, design a linearithmic algorithm to
count the number of inversions.

Hint: count while mergesorting.

### Question 3 Shuffling a linked list

Given a singly-linked list containing N items, rearrange the items
uniformly at random. Your algorithm should consume a logarithmic (or
constant) amount of extra memory and run in time proportional to NlogN in
the worst case.

Hint: design a linear-time subroutine that can take two uniformly shuffled
linked lists of sizes N₁ and N₂ and combined them into a uniformly
shuffled linked lists of size N₁ + N₂.

## Quicksort

### Question 1 Nuts and bolts

A disorganized carpenter has a mixed pile of N nuts and N bolts. The goal
is to find the corresponding pairs of nuts and bolts. Each nut fits
exactly one bolt and each bolt fits exactly one nut. By fitting a nut and
a bolt together, the carpenter can see which one is bigger (but the
carpenter cannot compare two nuts or two bolts directly). Design an
algorithm for the problem that uses NlogN compares (probabilistically).

Hint: modify the quicksort partitioning part of quicksort.

Remark: This research paper gives an algorithm that runs in N log⁴ N time
in the worst case.

### Question 2 Selection in two sorted arrays

Given two sorted arrays a[] and b[], of sizes N₁ and N₂, respectively,
design an algorithm to find the kth largest key. The order of growth of
the worst case running time of your algorithm should be logN, where N = N₁ + N₂.

  * Version 1: N₁ = N₂ and k = N/2
  * Version 2: k = N/2
  * Version 3: no restrictions

Hints: there are two basic approaches.

  * Approach A: Compute the median in a[] and the median in b[]. Recur in
    a subproblem of roughly half the size.
  * Approach B: Design a constant-time algorithm to determine whether a[i]
    is the k-th largest key. Use this subroutine and binary search.

Dealing with corner cases can be tricky.

### Question 3 Decimal dominants

Given an array with N keys, design an algorithm to find all values that
occur more than N/10 times. The expected running time of your algorithm
should be linear.

Hint: determine the (N/10)-th largest key using quickselect and check if
it occurs more than N/10 times.

Alternate solution hint: use 9 counters.

## Priority Queues

### Question 1 Dynamic median

Design a data type that supports insert in logarithmic time,
find-the-median in constant time, and remove-the-median in logarithmic
time.

Hint: maintain two binary heaps, one that is max-oriented and one that is
min-oriented.

### Question 2 Randomized priority queue

Describe how to add the methods sample() and delRandom() to our binary
heap implementation. The two methods return a key that is chosen uniformly
at random among the remaining keys, with the latter method also removing
that key. The sample() method should take constant time; the delRandom()
method should take logarithmic time. Do not worry about resizing the
underlying array.

### Question 3 Taxicab numbers

A taxicab number is an integer that can be expressed as the sum of two
cubes of integers in two different ways: a³ + b³ = c³ + d³. For example,
1729 = 9³ + 10³ = 1³ + 12³.

Design an algorithm to find all taxicab numbers with a, b, c, and d less
than N.

  * Version 1: Use time proportional to N² logN and space proportional to
    N².
  * Version 2: Use time proportional to N² logN and space proportional to
    N.

Hints:

  * Version 1: Form the sums a³ + b³ and sort.
  * Version 2: Use a min-oriented priority queue with N items.

## Elementary Symbol Tables

### Question 1 Java autoboxing and equals()

Consider two double values a and b and their corresponding Double values x
and y.

  * Find values such that (a == b) is true but x.equals(y) is false.
  * Find values such that (a == b) is false but x.equals(y) is true.

Hint: IEEE floating point arithmetic has some peculiar rules for 0.0,
-0.0, and NaN. Java requires that equals() implements an equivalence
relation.

### Question 2 Check if a binary tree is a BST

Given a binary tree where each Node contains a key, determine whether it
is a binary search tree. Use extra space proportional to the height of the
tree.

Hint: design a recursive function isBST(Node x, Key min, Key max) that
determines whether x is the root of a binary search tree with all keys
between min and max.

### Question 3 Inorder traversal with constant extra space

Design an algorithm to perform an inorder traversal of a binary search
tree using only a constant amount of extra space.

Hint: you may modify the BST during the traversal provided you restore it
upon completion.

### Question 4 Web tracking

Suppose that you are tracking N web sites and M users and you want to
support the following API:

  * User visits a website.
  * How many times has a given user visited a given site?

What data structure or data structures would you use?

Hint: maintain a symbol table of symbol tables.

## Balanced Search Trees

### Question 1 Red-black BST with no extra memory

Describe how to save the memory for storing the color information when
implementing a red-black BST.

Hint: modify the structure of the BST to encode the color information.

### Question 2 Document search

Design an algorithm that takes a sequence of N document words and a
sequence of M query words and find the shortest interval in which the M
query words appear in the document in the order given. The length of an
interval is the number of words in that interval.

Hint: for each word, maintain a sorted list of the indices in the document
in which that word appears. Scan through the sorted lists of the query
words in a judicious manner.

### Question 3 Generalized queue

Design a generalized queue data type that supports all of the following
operations in logarithmic time (or better) in the worst case.

  * Create an empty data structure.
  * Append an item to the end of the queue.
  * Remove an item from the front of the queue.
  * Return the i-th item in the queue.
  * Remove the i-th item from the queue.

Hint: create a red-black BST where the keys are integers and the values
are the items such that the i^th largest integer key in the red-black BST
corresponds to the i-th item in the queue.

## Geometric Applications of BSTs

### Question 1 Stabbing count queries

Suppose that you have a huge log file containing the entry and exit time
for each of the N people that entered and exited a building on a given
day. Design a data type that returns the number of people in the building
at any given query time. Each query should take logarithmic time or better
as a function of N.

Hint: you can interpret each log entry as an interval whose left endpoint
is the entry time and whose right endpoint is the exit time. Put the left
endpoints in one data structure and the right endpoints in another data
structure. Use the rank() method.

## Hash Tables

### Question 1 4-SUM

Given an array a[] of N integers, the 4-SUM problem is to determine if
there exist distinct indices i, j, k, and l such that a[i] + a[j] = a[k] +
a[l]. Design an algorithm for the 4-SUM problem that takes time
proportional to N² (under suitable technical assumptions).

Hint: create a hash table with (N/2) (binome) key-value pairs.

### Question 2 Hashing with wrong hashCode() or equals()

Suppose that you implement a data type OlympicAthlete for use in a
java.util.HashMap.

  * Describe what happens if you override hashCode() but not equals().
  * Describe what happens if you override equals() but not hashCode().
  * Describe what happens if you override hashCode() but implement public
    boolean equals(OlympicAthlete that) instead of public boolean
    equals(Object that).

Hint: it is code — try it and see!